In this lecture, I'm going to show you how to manipulate the OSPF metric, which is the cost in the lab.
We've got our usual lab setup of routers R1 to R5, all their interfaces are in networks beginning with
10.
And if we have a look at the configuration, I'll do a 'show ip route' on R1, you can see that I've already
got OSPF configured on all of my routers. Back at the lab topology, the 10.1.2.0/24 network
is available behind R4. So R1 could get there even along the top path via R2 and R3, or along
the bottom path via R5.
So, let's have a look and see which path it is taking.
So from our 'show ip route', I can see the route was learned via OSPF, to the 10.1.2.0/24 network.
It's going via 10.0.3.2, which is along the bottom path via R5, which is what
we'd expect because it's a shorter path, and Administrative Distance (AD) is 110, the default for OSPF, and
the metric, the cost, currently is 3.
So if we look back at the topology diagram again, the reason it's got a cost of 3 is that all the interfaces
are FastEthernet, so they all have a cost of 1.
So we've got the link itself has got a cost of 1, then the link from R4 to R5 is also a cost of 1,
then from R5 to R1 is also 1.
So we add up 1, 1, and 1 together,
that gives us our cost of 3.
So we're using the default reference bandwidth of 100 there, where the best possible interface
is a FastEthernet interface.
We had GigabitEthernet, or 10GigabitEthernet, etc., that would still have a cost of 1.
It would not be treated any better than the slower
FastEthernet interface. So we want to set a higher reference bandwidth, so that those newer, faster Ethernet
interfaces, like Gigabit and 10GigabitEthernet, will be preferred over the slower FastEthernet. So to
do that,
it's going to be the same config on all the routers. You want to configure this on all the routers in
your network or you can get unexpected results. You need them to all have the same consistent reference
bandwidth.
So I'm going to open up a text editor for this, and the commands I want to use are 'router ospf 1',
and then the command is 'auto-cost reference-bandwidth', and I'll set it to a high enough
value that I'm future proofing myself as well. So I'll set this to 100000, and then I'm
going to copy and paste this in to all of my routers.
So there, I need to do a 'config t', so there is R1 and you see it gives me the warning, make sure you do this
and all of your routers.
And I'll also paste it into R2,
and why did that not take the command. Let me try pasting it in again. Okay, that's got corrupted somehow.
So let me go copy it again, so Control-C to copy it from my text document again, and then back on the router,
paste it in.
That took it okay
this time. That's also to show you as well that even when you are copying and pasting on a Cisco router, have a
look at the output and check it's taken the commands correctly. Do also on R3, on R4, and R5.
Okay, so that should be good
now.
So you saw when we did the 'show ip route' for the 10.1.2.0 network,
the cost was 3.
This should be updated
now.
So if I now you do a 'do show ip route',
you see for the 10.1.2.0 network, it's got a cost of 3000 now because
100000 divided by 100 is 1000 and we had the 3 links,
so that gives us a total cost of 3000.
Okay, so that's
the effect of the reference bandwidth.
If we had another path, which had GigabitEthernet interfaces now, rather than each of those having a cost
of 1000, they would have a cost of 100,
so it would be preferred.
Okay.
Next thing to do is let's change the path here. So the traffic for 10.1.2.0 is currently going via
10.0.3.2, which is on R5 along the bottom path, with a cost of 3000.
Let's have a look at our network topology again, and what I want to do is change the traffic.
So rather than going along the bottom path, I'm going to move it to the top path.
I could either give the top path a lower cost, or I can manipulate it by giving the bottom path a higher
cost than what it is now.
So there's only two links along the bottom, so it's going to be quicker to change it along the bottom path.
So each link now
currently has a cost of 1000. Let's set these two links here, from R1 to R5 and from R5 to
R4, to have a cost of 2000 instead.
So that will give the bottom path the total cost of 5000, the 2000 here, the 2000
from R5 to R4, and a 1000 on the link itself,
so 5000 on the bottom path. Along the top path will be 1, 2, 3, 4000, so the top path will
be preferred.
And I want to do this on all the interfaces along the bottom path, so that I've got the consistent cost
on each link on both sides of the link, So I'll go on to R1 first, and that was on interface
FastEthernet3/0, is facing R5,
and I'll say 'ip cost ospf 2000',
and oh, it's because of missed out the OSPF. So 'ip ospf cost 2000' is the correct command,
so that was on R1. Then on R5, it's on interfaces FastEthernet2/0, 'ip ospf cost 2000',
and I'll hit the up arrow a couple of times and change this to FastEthernet3/0, and 'ip ospf cost 2000'.
And finally, on R4, it's 'interface FastEthernet2/0', which is facing R5, and 'ip ospf cost 2000'.
So that bottom path should now be a higher cost than the top path, if I go back onto R1, and I do
a 'show ip route' now, you see previously, it was going via 10.0.3.2. Now, to get to
10.1.2.0, the next hop is 10.0.0.2, that's R2 along the top path.
Okay,
so that's how we change the reference bandwidth, and also how we can manipulate the paths our traffic
is going to take, through the OSPF cost.